# Contributor's Guide

Pyzo is developed by volunteers in their free time without any kind of compensation.
Feel free to also contribute. There are tens of thousands of Pyzo users which could
benefit even from tiny improvements.


## Communication

If you have a question about Pyzo or encounter a problem, please start a
[discussion](https://github.com/pyzo/pyzo/discussions) or create an
[issue](https://github.com/pyzo/pyzo/issues) on the Pyzo GitHub page.
Feel free to also just say hello and describe your experience with using Pyzo, and
what you like and dislike about it.

If you already know how to modify Pyzo's source code and if you want to contribute
a bug-fix or a new feature, please create a pull request. There is no guarantee
that a PR will be merged.

You can always reach out to other developers by starting a discussion or creating
an issue.

We are all human beings (and hopefully not bots), so please be nice and respectful
to each other.


## AI Policy

*This policy was gratefully inspired by the AI policies of SciPy and scikit-image.*

We are a small developer team, and we enjoy reviewing and discussing code
written by other humans. We recognize that LLMs may be useful, but overall
prefer for contributions to be hand-written.

### Responsibility

You are responsible for all the code that you contribute, including the AI
generated code. You must understand and be able to explain the submitted code as
well as its relation with the surrounding code. It is not acceptable to submit a
patch that you cannot understand and explain yourself.

### Disclosure

You must disclose whether AI has been used to produce any code of your
pull-request. If so, you must document which tool(s) have been used, how they
were used, and specify what code or text is AI generated.

### Copyright

Contributors must own the copyright of any code submitted to Pyzo. Code
generated by AI may infringe on copyright and it is your responsibility to not
infringe. We reserve the right to reject any pull requests where the copyright
is in question.

### Communication

When interacting with developers (in discussions, issues, pull-requests,
etc.) do not use AI to speak for you, except for translation or grammar editing.
Human-to-human communication is essential for an open source community to
thrive.

### AI Agents

The use of an AI agent that writes code and then submits a pull request
autonomously is not permitted.


## Developer's Handbook

### Coding Style

The Pyzo project uses `ruff` to format and lint the code:

```bash
# Reformat the code if necessary
ruff format
# Check for linting errors.
ruff check
```

Pyzo modules that use a Qt library, mostly use the `lowerCamelCase` naming convention
for identifiers instead of `snake_case`. This is to avoid mixed styles for example in
methods of classes which are derived from classes of the Qt library.


### Python versions

When executing code in Pyzo, there are two different Python interpreters involved:
* one that runs the Pyzo IDE (with the Qt library for the GUI)
* and one that runs the Pyzo kernel code for the shell where the user executes code.

The Python interpreter for the Pyzo kernel is the one that the user specified in the shell configuration.
This can be almost any Python version >= v2.7, including PyPy.

The minimum version for the interpreter, that runs the Pyzo IDE, is specified in pyproject.toml
and pyzo/\_\_init\_\_.py, e.g. Python >= v3.6.

Everything in "pyzo/pyzokernel/" is executed by the "kernel" Python interpreter.  
Everything in "pyzo/yoton/" is executed by both, the "IDE" Python and the "kernel" Python interpreter.  
Everything else is only executed by the "IDE" Python interpreter.

Special care has to be taken when modifying code that is run by the kernel because modern
tools such as ruff will not find or even cause problems like syntax errors for Python 2.7.


### Pyzo Tool development (Plug-Ins)

See [the example tool](https://github.com/pyzo/pyzo/blob/main/pyzo/resources/code_examples/myRunner.py).
